==============================================
What's new in MyHDL 0.4: Conversion to Verilog
==============================================

:Author: Jan Decaluwe

Introduction
============

MyHDL 0.4 supports the automatic conversion of a subset of MyHDL code to
synthesizable Verilog code. This feature provides a direct path from
Python to an FPGA or ASIC implementation.

MyHDL aims to be a complete design language, for tasks such as high
level modeling and verification, but also for implementation. However,
prior to 0.4 a user had to translate MyHDL code manually to Verilog or
VHDL. Needless to say, this was inconvenient. With MyHDL0.4, this manual
step is no longer necessary.

Solution description
====================

The solution works as follows. The hardware description should be
modeled in MyHDL style, and satisfy certain constraints that are typical
for implementation-oriented hardware modeling. Subsequently, such a
design is converted to an equivalent model in the Verilog language,
using the function :func:`toVerilog` from the MyHDLlibrary. Finally, a
third-party *synthesis tool* is used to convert the Verilog design to a
gate implementation for an ASIC or FPGA. There are a number of Verilog
synthesis tools available, varying in price, capabilities, and target
implementation technology.

The conversion does not start from source files, but from a design that
has been *elaborated* by the Python interpreter. The converter uses the
Python profiler to track the interpreter’s operation and to infer the
design structure and name spaces. It then selectively compiles pieces of
source code for additional analysis and for conversion. This is done
using the Python compiler package.

Features
========

The design is converted after elaboration
-----------------------------------------

*Elaboration* refers to the initial processing of a hardware description
to achieve a representation of a design instance that is ready for
simulation or synthesis. In particular, structural parameters and
constructs are processed in this step. In MyHDL, the Python interpreter
itself is used for elaboration. A :class:`Simulation` object is
constructed with elaborated design instances as arguments. Likewise, the
Verilog conversion works on an elaborated design instance. The Python
interpreter is thus used as much as possible.

The structural description can be arbitrarily complex and hierarchical
----------------------------------------------------------------------

As the conversion works on an elaborated design instance, any modeling
constraints only apply to the leaf elements of the design structure,
that is, the co-operating generators. In other words, there are no
restrictions on the description of the design structure: Python’s full
power can be used for that purpose. Also, the design hierarchy can be
arbitrarily deep.

Generators are mapped to Verilog always or initial blocks
---------------------------------------------------------

The converter analyzes the code of each generator and maps it to a
Verilog ``always`` blocks if possible, and to an ``initial`` block
otherwise. The converted Verilog design will be a flat “net list of
blocks”.

The Verilog module interface is inferred from signal usage
----------------------------------------------------------

In MyHDL, the input or output direction of interface signals is not
explicitly declared. The converter investigates signal usage in the
design hierarchy to infer whether a signal is used as input, output, or
as an internal signal. Internal signals are given a hierarchical name in
the Verilog output.

Function calls are mapped to a unique Verilog function or task call
-------------------------------------------------------------------

The converter analyzes function calls and function code to see if they
should be mapped to Verilog functions or to tasks. Python functions are
much more powerful than Verilog subprograms; for example, they are
inherently generic, and they can be called with named association. To
support this power in Verilog, a unique Verilog function or task is
generated per Python function call.

If-then-else structures may be mapped to Verilog case statements
----------------------------------------------------------------

Python does not provide a case statement. However, the converter
recognizes if-then-else structures in which a variable is sequentially
compared to items of an enumeration type, and maps such a structure to a
Verilog case statement with the appropriate synthesis attributes.

Choice of encoding schemes for enumeration types
------------------------------------------------

The :func:`enum` function in MyHDL returns an enumeration type. This
function takes an additional parameter ``encoding`` that specifies the
desired encoding in the implementation: binary, one hot, or one cold.
The Verilog converter generates the appropriate code.

The convertible subset
======================

Introduction
------------

Unsurprisingly, not all MyHDL code can be converted to Verilog. In fact,
there are very important restrictions. As the goal of the conversion
functionality is implementation, this should not be a big issue: anyone
familiar with synthesis is used to similar restrictions in the
*synthesizable subset* of Verilog and VHDL. The converter attempts to
issue clear error messages when it encounters a construct that cannot be
converted.

In practice, the synthesizable subset usually refers to RTL synthesis,
which is by far the most popular type of synthesis today. There are
industry standards that define the RTL synthesis subset. However, those
were not used as a model for the restrictions of the MyHDL converter,
but as a minimal starting point. On that basis, whenever it was judged
easy or useful to support an additional feature, this was done. For
example, it is actually easier to convert :keyword:`while` loops than
:keyword:`for` loops even though they are not RTL-synthesizable. As
another example, :keyword:`print` is supported because it’s so useful
for debugging, even though it’s not synthesizable. In summary, the
convertible subset is a superset of the standard RTL synthesis subset,
and supports synthesis tools with more advanced capabilities, such as
behavioral synthesis.

Recall that any restrictions only apply to the design post elaboration.
In practice, this means that they apply only to the code of the
generators, that are the leaf functional blocks in a MyHDL design.

Coding style
------------

A natural restriction on convertible code is that it should be written
in MyHDL style: cooperating generators, communicating through signals,
and with ``yield`` statements specifying wait points and resume
conditions. Supported resume conditions are a signal edge, a signal
change, or a tuple of such conditions.

Supported types
---------------

The most important restriction regards object types. Verilog is an
almost typeless language, while Python is strongly (albeit dynamically)
typed. The converter has to infer the types of names used in the code,
and map those names to Verilog variables.

Only a limited amount of types can be converted. Python :class:`int` and
:class:`long` objects are mapped to Verilog integers. All other
supported types are mapped to Verilog regs (or wires), and therefore
need to have a defined bit width. The supported types are the Python
:class:`bool` type, the MyHDL :class:`intbv` type, and MyHDL enumeration
types returned by function :func:`enum`. The latter objects can also be
used as the base object of a :class:`Signal`.

:class:`intbv` objects must be constructed so that a bit width can be
inferred. This can be done by specifying minimum and maximum values,
e.g. as follows:

::

    index = intbv(0, min=0, max=2**N)

Alternatively, a slice can be taken from an :class:`intbv` object as
follows:

::

    index = intbv(0)[N:]

Such as slice returns a new :class:`intbv` object, with minimum value
``0`` , and maximum value ``2**N``.

Supported statements
--------------------

The following is a list of the statements that are supported by the
Verilog converter, possibly qualified with restrictions or usage notes.

The :keyword:`break` statement.

The :keyword:`continue` statement.

The :keyword:`def` statement.

The :keyword:`for` statement.
    The only supported iteration scheme is iterating through sequences
    of integers returned by built-in function :func:`range` or
    MyHDLfunction :func:`downrange`. The optional :keyword:`else` clause
    is not supported.

The :keyword:`if` statement.
    :keyword:`if`, :keyword:`elif`, and :keyword:`else` clauses are
    fully supported.

The :keyword:`pass` statement.

The :keyword:`print` statement.
    When printing an interpolated string, the format specifiers are
    copied verbatim to the Verilog output. Printing to a file (with
    syntax ``’>>’``) is not supported.

The :keyword:`raise` statement.
    This statement is mapped to Verilog statements that end the
    simulation with an error message.

The :keyword:`return` statement.

The :keyword:`yield` statement.
    The yielded expression can be a signal, a signal edge as specified
    by MyHDL functions :func:`posedge` or :func:`negedge`, or a tuple of
    signals and edge specifications.

The :keyword:`while` statement.
    The optional :keyword:`else` clause is not supported.

Methodology notes
=================

Simulation
----------

In the Python philosophy, the run-time rules. The Python compiler
doesn’t attempt to detect a lot of errors beyond syntax errors, which
given Python’s ultra-dynamic nature would be an almost impossible task
anyway. To verify a Python program, one should run it, preferably using
unit testing to verify each feature.

The same philosophy should be used when converting a MyHDL description
to Verilog: make sure the simulation runs fine first. Although the
converter checks many things and attempts to issue clear error messages,
there is no guarantee that it does a meaningful job unless the
simulation runs fine.

Conversion output verification
------------------------------

It is always prudent to verify the converted Verilog output. To make
this task easier, the converter also generates a test bench that makes
it possible to simulate the Verilog design using the Verilog
co-simulation interface. This permits to verify the Verilog code with
the same test bench used for the MyHDL code. This is also how the
Verilog converter development is being verified.

Assignment issues
-----------------

Name assignment in Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Name assignment in Python is a different concept than in many other
languages. This point is very important for effective modeling in
Python, and even more so for synthesizable MyHDL code. Therefore, the
issues are discussed here explicitly.

Consider the following name assignments:

::

    a = 4
    a = ``a string''
    a = False

In many languages, the meaning would be that an existing variable ``a``
gets a number of different values. In Python, such a concept of a
variable doesn’t exist. Instead, assignment merely creates a new binding
of a name to a certain object, that replaces any previous binding. So in
the example, the name ``a`` is bound a number of different objects in
sequence.

The Verilog converter has to investigate name assignment and usage in
MyHDL code, and to map names to Verilog variables. To achieve that, it
tries to infer the type and possibly the bit width of each expression
that is assigned to a name.

Multiple assignments to the same name can be supported if it can be
determined that a consistent type and bit width is being used in the
assignments. This can be done for boolean expressions, numeric
expressions, and enumeration type literals. In Verilog, the
corresponding name is mapped to a single bit ``reg``, an ``integer``, or
a ``reg`` with the appropriate width, respectively.

In other cases, a single assignment should be used when an object is
created. Subsequent value changes are then achieved by modification of
an existing object. This technique should be used for :class:`Signal`
and :class:`intbv` objects.

Signal assignment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Signal assignment in MyHDL is implemented using attribute assignment to
attribute ``next``. Value changes are thus modeled by modification of
the existing object. The converter investigates the :class:`Signal`
object to infer the type and bit width of the corresponding Verilog
variable.

:class:`intbv` objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type :class:`intbv` is likely to be the workhorse for synthesizable
modeling in MyHDL. An :class:`intbv` instance behaves like a (mutable)
integer whose individual bits can be accessed and modified. Also, it is
possible to constrain its set of values. In addition to error checking,
this makes it possible to infer a bit width, which is required for
implementation.

In Verilog, an :class:`intbv` instance will be mapped to a ``reg`` with
an appropriate width. As noted before, it is not possible to modify its
value using name assignment. In the following, we will show how it can
be done instead. Consider:

::

    a = intbv(0)[8:]

This is an :class:`intbv` object with initial value ``0`` and bit width
8. The change its value to ``5``, we can use slice assignment:

::

    a[8:] = 5

The same can be achieved by leaving the bit width unspecified, which has
the meaning to change “all” bits:

::

    a[:] = 5

Often the new value will depend on the old one. For example, to
increment an :class:`intbv` with the technique above:

::

    a[:] = a + 1

Python also provides *augmented* assignment operators, which can be used
to implement in-place operations. These are supported on :class:`intbv`
objects and by the converter, so that the increment can also be done as
follows:

::

    a += 1

Converter usage
===============

We will demonstrate the conversion process by showing some examples.

A small design with a single generator
--------------------------------------

Consider the following MyHDL code for an incrementer module:

::

    def inc(count, enable, clock, reset, n):
        """ Incrementer with enable.
        
        count -- output
        enable -- control input, increment when 1
        clock -- clock input
        reset -- asynchronous reset input
        n -- counter max value
        """
        def incProcess():
            while 1:
                yield posedge(clock), negedge(reset)
                if reset == ACTIVE_LOW:
                    count.next = 0
                else:
                    if enable:
                        count.next = (count + 1) % n
        return incProcess()

In Verilog terminology, function :func:`inc` corresponds to a module,
while generator function :func:`incProcess` roughly corresponds to an
always block.

Normally, to simulate the design, we would “elaborate” an instance as
follows:

::

    m = 8
    n = 2 ** m
     
    count = Signal(intbv(0)[m:])
    enable = Signal(bool(0))
    clock, reset = [Signal(bool()) for i in range(2)]

    inc_inst = inc(count, enable, clock, reset, n=n)

``incinst`` is an elaborated design instance that can be simulated. To
convert it to Verilog, we change the last line as follows:

::

    inc_inst = toVerilog(inc, count, enable, clock, reset, n=n)

Again, this creates an instance that can be simulated, but as a side
effect, it also generates an equivalent Verilog module in file . The
Verilog code looks as follows:

::

    module inc_inst (
        count,
        enable,
        clock,
        reset
    );

    output [7:0] count;
    reg [7:0] count;
    input enable;
    input clock;
    input reset;


    always @(posedge clock or negedge reset) begin: _MYHDL1_BLOCK
        if ((reset == 0)) begin
            count <= 0;
        end
        else begin
            if (enable) begin
                count <= ((count + 1) % 256);
            end
        end
    end

    endmodule

You can see the module interface and the always block, as expected from
the MyHDL design.

Converting a generator directly
-------------------------------

It is also possible to convert a generator directly. For example,
consider the following generator function:

::

    def bin2gray(B, G, width):
        """ Gray encoder.

        B -- input intbv signal, binary encoded
        G -- output intbv signal, gray encoded
        width -- bit width
        """
        Bext = intbv(0)[width+1:]
        while 1:
            yield B
            Bext[:] = B
            for i in range(width):
                G.next[i] = Bext[i+1] ^ Bext[i]

As before, you can create an instance and convert to Verilog as follows:

::

    width = 8

    B = Signal(intbv(0)[width:])
    G = Signal(intbv(0)[width:])

    bin2gray_inst = toVerilog(bin2gray, B, G, width)
     

The generated Verilog code looks as follows:

::

    module bin2gray_inst (
        B,
        G
    );

    input [7:0] B;
    output [7:0] G;
    reg [7:0] G;

    always @(B) begin: _MYHDL1_BLOCK
        integer i;
        reg [9-1:0] Bext;
        Bext[9-1:0] = B;
        for (i=0; i<8; i=i+1) begin
            G[i] <= (Bext[(i + 1)] ^ Bext[i]);
        end
    end

    endmodule

A hierarchical design
---------------------

The hierarchy of convertible designs can be arbitrarily deep.

For example, suppose we want to design an incrementer with Gray code
output. Using the designs from previous sections, we can proceed as
follows:

::

    def GrayInc(graycnt, enable, clock, reset, width):
        
        bincnt = Signal(intbv()[width:])
        
        INC_1 = inc(bincnt, enable, clock, reset, n=2**width)
        BIN2GRAY_1 = bin2gray(B=bincnt, G=graycnt, width=width)
        
        return INC_1, BIN2GRAY_1

According to Gray code properties, only a single bit will change in
consecutive values. However, as the ``bin2gray`` module is
combinatorial, the output bits may have transient glitches, which may
not be desirable. To solve this, let’s create an additional level of
hierarchy and add an output register to the design. (This will create an
additional latency of a clock cycle, which may not be acceptable, but we
will ignore that here.)

::

    def GrayIncReg(graycnt, enable, clock, reset, width):
        
        graycnt_comb = Signal(intbv()[width:])
        
        GRAY_INC_1 = GrayInc(graycnt_comb, enable, clock, reset, width)
        
        def reg():
            while 1:
                yield posedge(clock)
                graycnt.next = graycnt_comb
        REG_1 = reg()
        
        return GRAY_INC_1, REG_1

We can convert this hierarchical design as before:

::

    width = 8
    graycnt = Signal(intbv()[width:])
    enable, clock, reset = [Signal(bool()) for i in range(3)]

    GRAY_INC_REG_1 = toVerilog(GrayIncReg, graycnt, enable, clock, reset, width)

The Verilog output code looks as follows:

::

    module GRAY_INC_REG_1 (
        graycnt,
        enable,
        clock,
        reset
    );

    output [7:0] graycnt;
    reg [7:0] graycnt;
    input enable;
    input clock;
    input reset;

    reg [7:0] graycnt_comb;
    reg [7:0] _GRAY_INC_1_bincnt;

    always @(posedge clock or negedge reset) begin: _MYHDL1_BLOCK
        if ((reset == 0)) begin
            _GRAY_INC_1_bincnt <= 0;
        end
        else begin
            if (enable) begin
                _GRAY_INC_1_bincnt <= ((_GRAY_INC_1_bincnt + 1) % 256);
            end
        end
    end

    always @(_GRAY_INC_1_bincnt) begin: _MYHDL4_BLOCK
        integer i;
        reg [9-1:0] Bext;
        Bext[9-1:0] = _GRAY_INC_1_bincnt;
        for (i=0; i<8; i=i+1) begin
            graycnt_comb[i] <= (Bext[(i + 1)] ^ Bext[i]);
        end
    end

    always @(posedge clock) begin: _MYHDL9_BLOCK
        graycnt <= graycnt_comb;
    end

    endmodule

Note that the output is a flat “net list of blocks”, and that
hierarchical signal names are generated as necessary.

Optimizations for finite state machines
---------------------------------------

As often in hardware design, finite state machines deserve special
attention.

In Verilog and VHDL, finite state machines are typically described using
case statements. Python doesn’t have a case statement, but the converter
recognizes particular if-then-else structures and maps them to case
statements. This optimization occurs when a variable whose type is an
enumerated type is sequentially tested against enumeration items in an
if-then-else structure. Also, the appropriate synthesis pragmas for
efficient synthesis are generated in the Verilog code.

As a further optimization, function :func:`enum` was enhanced to support
alternative encoding schemes elegantly, using an additional parameter
``encoding``. For example:

::

    t_State = enum('SEARCH', 'CONFIRM', 'SYNC', encoding='one_hot')

The default encoding is ``’binary’``; the other possibilities are
``’onehot’`` and ``’onecold’``. This parameter only affects the
conversion output, not the behavior of the type. The generated Verilog
code for case statements is optimized for an efficient implementation
according to the encoding. Note that in contrast, a Verilog designer has
to make nontrivial code changes to implement a different encoding
scheme.

As an example, consider the following finite state machine, whose state
variable uses the enumeration type defined above:

::

    FRAME_SIZE = 8

    def FramerCtrl(SOF, state, syncFlag, clk, reset_n):
        
        """ Framing control FSM.

        SOF -- start-of-frame output bit
        state -- FramerState output
        syncFlag -- sync pattern found indication input
        clk -- clock input
        reset_n -- active low reset
        
        """
        
        index = intbv(0, min=0, max=8) # position in frame
        while 1:
            yield posedge(clk), negedge(reset_n)
            if reset_n == ACTIVE_LOW:
                SOF.next = 0
                index[:] = 0
                state.next = t_State.SEARCH
            else:
                SOF.next = 0
                if state == t_State.SEARCH:
                    index[:] = 0
                    if syncFlag:
                        state.next = t_State.CONFIRM
                elif state == t_State.CONFIRM:
                    if index == 0:
                        if syncFlag:
                            state.next = t_State.SYNC
                        else:
                            state.next = t_State.SEARCH
                elif state == t_State.SYNC:
                    if index == 0:
                        if not syncFlag:
                            state.next = t_State.SEARCH
                    SOF.next = (index == FRAME_SIZE-1)
                else:
                    raise ValueError("Undefined state")
                index[:]= (index + 1) % FRAME_SIZE

The conversion is done as before:

::

    SOF = Signal(bool(0))
    syncFlag = Signal(bool(0))
    clk = Signal(bool(0))
    reset_n = Signal(bool(1))
    state = Signal(t_State.SEARCH)
    framerctrl_inst = toVerilog(FramerCtrl, SOF, state, syncFlag, clk, reset_n)

The Verilog output looks as follows:

::

    module framerctrl_inst (
        SOF,
        state,
        syncFlag,
        clk,
        reset_n
    );
    output SOF;
    reg SOF;
    output [2:0] state;
    reg [2:0] state;
    input syncFlag;
    input clk;
    input reset_n;

    always @(posedge clk or negedge reset_n) begin: _MYHDL1_BLOCK
        reg [3-1:0] index;
        if ((reset_n == 0)) begin
            SOF <= 0;
            index[3-1:0] = 0;
            state <= 3'b001;
        end
        else begin
            SOF <= 0;
            // synthesis parallel_case full_case
            casez (state)
                3'b??1: begin
                    index[3-1:0] = 0;
                    if (syncFlag) begin
                        state <= 3'b010;
                    end
                end
                3'b?1?: begin
                    if ((index == 0)) begin
                        if (syncFlag) begin
                            state <= 3'b100;
                        end
                        else begin
                            state <= 3'b001;
                        end
                    end
                end
                3'b1??: begin
                    if ((index == 0)) begin
                        if ((!syncFlag)) begin
                            state <= 3'b001;
                        end
                    end
                    SOF <= (index == (8 - 1));
                end
                default: begin
                    $display("Verilog: ValueError(Undefined state)");
                    $finish;
                end
            endcase
            index[3-1:0] = ((index + 1) % 8);
        end
    end
    endmodule

Known issues
============

Negative values of :class:`intbv` instances are not supported.
    The :class:`intbv` class is quite capable of representing negative
    values. However, the ``signed`` type support in Verilog is
    relatively recent and mapping to it may be tricky. In my judgment,
    this was not the most urgent requirement, so I decided to leave this
    for later.

Verilog integers are 32 bit wide
    Usually, Verilog integers are 32 bit wide. In contrast, Python is
    moving toward integers with undefined width. Python :class:`int` and
    :class:`long` variables are mapped to Verilog integers; so for
    values wider than 32 bit this mapping is incorrect.

Synthesis pragmas are specified as Verilog comments.
    The recommended way to specify synthesis pragmas in Verilog is
    through attribute lists. However, my Verilog simulator (Icarus)
    doesn’t support them for ``case`` statements (to specify
    ``parallelcase`` and ``fullcase`` pragmas). Therefore, I still used
    the old but deprecated method of synthesis pragmas in Verilog
    comments.

Inconsistent place of the sensitivity list inferred from ``alwayscomb``.
    The semantics of ``alwayscomb``, both in Verilog and MyHDL, is to
    have an implicit sensitivity list at the end of the code. However,
    this may not be synthesizable. Therefore, the inferred sensitivity
    list is put at the top of the corresponding ``always`` block. This
    may cause inconsistent behavior at the start of the simulation. The
    workaround is to create events at time 0.

Non-blocking assignments to task arguments don’t work.
    I didn’t get non-blocking (signal) assignments to task arguments to
    work. I don’t know yet whether the issue is my own, a Verilog issue,
    or an issue with my Verilog simulator Icarus. I’ll need to check
    this further.
