.. currentmodule:: myhdl

.. _new06:

***********************
What's new in MyHDL 0.6
***********************

Conversion to VHDL
==================


Rationale
---------

Since the MyHDL to Verilog conversion has been developed, a path to
implementation from MyHDL is available. Given the widespread support
for Verilog, it could thus be argued that there was no real need for a
convertor to VHDL.

However, it turns out that VHDL is still very much alive and will
remain so for the forseeable future. This is especially true for the
FPGA market, which is especially interesting for MyHDL. It seems much
more dynamic than the ASIC market. Moreover, because of the nature of
FPGA's, FPGA designers may be more willing to try out new ideas.

To convince designers to use a new tool, it should integrate with
their current design flow. That is why the MyHDL to VHDL convertor is
needed. It should lower the threshold for VHDL designers to start
using MyHDL.

Advantages
----------

MyHDL to VHDL conversion offers the following advantages:

MyHDL integration in a VHDL-based design flow 
    Designers can start using MyHDL and benefit from its power and
    flexibility, within the context of their proven design flow.

The convertor automates a number of hard tasks 
    The convertor automates a number of tasks that are hard to do in
    VHDL directly. For example, when mixing ``unsigned`` and ``signed``
    types it can be difficult to describe the desired behavior
    correctly.  In contrast, a MyHDL designer can use the high-level
    ``intbv`` type, and let the convertor deal with type
    conversions and resizings.

MyHDL as an IP development platform 
    The possibility to convert the same MyHDL source to equivalent
    Verilog and VHDL creates a novel application: using MyHDL as an IP
    development platform. IP developers can serve customers for both
    target languages from a single MyHDL code base. Moreover, MyHDL's
    flexibility and parametrizability make it ideally suited to this
    application.


Solution description
--------------------

Approach
^^^^^^^^

The approach followed to convert MyHDL code to VHDL is identical to
the one followed for conversion to Verilog in previous MyHDL releases.

In particular, the MyHDL code analyzer in the convertor is identical
for both target languages. The goal is that all MyHDL code that can be
converted to Verilog can be converted to VHDL also, and
vice versa. This has been achieved except for a few minor issues due
to limitations of the target languages.

User interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Conversion to VHDL is implemented by the following function in the ``myhdl`` package:

.. function:: toVHDL(func[, *args][, **kwargs])
   :noindex:

   Converts a MyHDL design instance to equivalent VHDL
   code. *func* is a function that returns an instance. :func:`toVHDL`
   calls *func* under its control and passes *\*args* and
   *\*\*kwargs* to the call.

   The return value is the same as the one returned by the call
   ``func(*args, **kwargs)``. It can be assigned to an instance name.
   The top-level instance name and the basename of the Verilog
   output filename is ``func.func_name`` by default.
	
:func:`toVHDL` has the following attributes:

.. attribute:: toVHDL.name

  This attribute is used to overwrite the default top-level
  instance name and the basename of the VHDL output.

.. attribute:: toVHDL.component_declarations

  This attribute can be used to add component declarations to the
  VHDL output. When a string is assigned to it, it will be copied
  to the appropriate place in the output file.

Type mapping
^^^^^^^^^^^^^


In contrast to Verilog, VHDL is a strongly typed language. The
convertor has to carefully perform type inferencing, and handle type
conversions and resizings appropriately. To do this right, a
well-chosen mapping from MyHDL types to VHDL types is crucial.

MyHDL types are mapped to VHDL types according to the following table:

+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
|  MyHDL type                                | VHDL type                         | Notes     |
+============================================+===================================+===========+
| ``int``                                    | ``integer``                       |           |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``bool``                                   | ``std_logic``                     | \(1)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``intbv`` with ``min >= 0``                | ``unsigned``                      | \(2)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``intbv`` with  ``min < 0``                | ``signed``                        | \(2)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``enum``                                   | dedicated enumeration type        |           |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``tuple`` of ``int``                       | mapped to case statement          | \(3)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``list`` of ``bool``                       | ``array of std_logic``            |           |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``list`` of ``intbv`` with ``min >= 0``    | ``array of unsigned``             | \(4)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+
| ``list`` of ``intbv`` with ``min < 0``     | ``array of signed``               | \(4)      |
+--------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------+


Notes:

(1) 
   The VHDL ``std_logic`` type is defined in the standard VHDL package
   ``IEEE.std_logic_1164``.

(2)
   The VHDL ``unsigned`` and ``signed`` types used are those from the
   standard VHDL packages ``IEEE.numeric_std``.

(3)
   A MyHDL ``tuple`` of ``int`` is used for ROM inference, and can only be
   used in a very specific way: an indexing operation into the tuple
   should be the rhs of an assignment.

(4)
   All list members should have identical value constraints.

The table as presented applies to MyHDL variables. They are mapped to
VHDL variables (except for the case of a ``tuple`` of ``int``).

The convertor also supports MyHDL signals that use ``bool``,
``intbv`` or ``enum`` objects as their underlying type. These are mapped to
VHDL signals with a type as specified in the table above.

The convertor supports MyHDL list of signals provided the underlying
signal type is either ``bool`` or ``intbv``. They may be mapped to a VHDL
signal with a VHDL type as specified in the table.
However, list of signals are not always mapped to a corresponding VHDL
signal. See :ref:`new06-listofsigs` for more info.


Template transformation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There is a difference between VHDL and Verilog in the way in which
sensitivity to signal edges is specified. In Verilog, edge specifiers
can be used directly in the sensitivity list. In VHDL, this is not
possible: only signals can be used in the sensitivity list. To check
for an edge, one uses the ``rising_edge()`` or ``falling_edge()``
functions in the code.

MyHDL follows the Verilog scheme to specify edges in the sensitivity
list. Consequently, when mapping such code to VHDL, it needs to be
transformed to equivalent VHDL. This is an important issue because it
affects all synthesizable templates that infer sequential logic.

We will illustrate this feature with some examples. This is the MyHDL
code for a D flip-flop::


    @always(clk.posedge)
    def logic():
        q.next = d


It is converted to VHDL as follows::

    DFF_LOGIC: process (clk) is
    begin
        if rising_edge(clk) then
            q <= d;
        end if;
    end process DFF_LOGIC;


The convertor can handle the more general case. For example, this is
MyHDL code for a D flip-flop with asynchronous set, asynchronous
reset, and preference of set over reset::


    @always(clk.posedge, set.negedge, rst.negedge)
    def logic():
        if set == 0:
            q.next = 1
        elif rst == 0:
            q.next = 0
        else:
            q.next = d


This is converted to VHDL as follows::


    DFFSR_LOGIC: process (clk, set, rst) is
    begin
        if (set = '0') then
            q <= '1';
        elsif (rst = '0') then
            q <= '0';
        elsif rising_edge(clk) then
            q <= d;
        end if;
    end process DFFSR_LOGIC;


All cases with practical utility can be handled in this way. However,
there are other cases that cannot be transformed to equivalent
VHDL. The convertor will detect those cases and give an error.


.. _new06-listofsigs:

Conversion of lists of signals
==============================

Lists of signals are useful for many purposes. For example, they make
it easy to create a repetitive structure. Another application is the
description of memory behavior.

The convertor output is non-hierarchical. That implies that all
signals are declared at the top-level in VHDL or Verilog (as VHDL
signals, or Verilog regs and wires.)  However, some signals that are a
list member at some level in the design hierarchy may be used as
a plain signal at a lower level. For such signals, a choice has to be
made whether to declare a Verilog memory or VHDL array, or a number of
plain signal names.

If possible, plain signal declarations are preferred, because Verilog
memories and arrays have some restrictions in usage and tool support.
This is possible if the list syntax is strictly used outside generator
code, for example when lists of signals are used to describe
structure.

Conversely, when list syntax is used in some generator, then a Verilog
memory or VHDL array will be declared. The typical example is the
description of RAM memories.

The convertor in the previous MyHDL release had a severe restriction
on the latter case: it didn't allow that, for a certain signal, list
syntax was used in some generator, and plain signal syntax in another.
This restriction, together with its rather obscure error message, has
caused regular user complaints. In this release, this restriction has
been lifted.


.. _new06-test:


Conversion of test benches
==========================

Background
----------

After conversion, we obviously want to verify that the VHDL or Verilog
code works correctly. In previous MyHDL versions, the proposed
verification technique was co-simulation: use the same MyHDL test
bench to simulate the converted Verilog code and the original MyHDL
code. While co-simulation works well, there are a number of issues
with it:

* Co-simulation requires that the HDL simulator has an interface to
  its internal workings, such as ``vpi`` for Verilog and ``vhpi`` for
  VHDL.

* ``vpi`` for Verilog is well-established and available for
  open-source simulators such as Icarus and cver. However, ``vhpi`` for
  VHDL is much less established; it is unclear whether there is an open
  source solution that is powerful enough for MyHDL's purposes.

* Even though ``vpi`` is a "standard", there are differences between
  various simulators. Therefore, some customization is typically required
  per Verilog simulator.

* MyHDL co-simulation uses unix-style interprocess communication
  that doesn't work on Windows natively. This is an exception to the
  rest of MyHDL that should run on any Python platform.

The conclusion is that co-simulation is probably not a viable solution
for the VHDL case, and it has some disadvantages for Verilog as well.

The proposed alternative is to convert the test bench itself, so that
both test bench and design can be run in the HDL simulator. Of course,
this is not a fully general solution either, as there are important
restrictions on the kind of code that can be converted. However, with
the additional features that have been developed, it should be a
useful solution for verifying converted code.


Print statement
---------------

In previous MyHDL versions, :keyword:`print` statement conversion to Verilog was
supported in a quick and dirty way, by merely copying the format
string without checks. With the advent of VHDL conversion, this has
now been implemented more rigorously. This was necessary because VHDL
doesn't work with format strings. Rather, the format string
specification has to be converted to a sequence of VHDL ``write`` and
``writeline`` calls. 

A :keyword:`print` statement with multiple arguments::

    print arg1, arg2, ...

is supported. However, there are restrictions on the arguments.
First, they should be of one of the following forms::

    arg
    formatstring % arg
    formatstring % (arg1, arg2, ...)

where ``arg`` is a ``bool``, ``int``, ``intbv``, ``enum``, or a
``Signal`` of these types.

The ``formatstring`` contains ordinary characters and conversion
specifiers as in Python. However, the only supported conversion specifiers
are ``%s`` and ``%d``.
Justification and width specification are thus not supported.

Printing without a newline::

   print arg1 ,

is not supported. This is because the solution is based on
``std.textio``. In VHDL ``std.textio``, subsequent ``write()`` calls to
a line are only printed upon a ``writeline()`` call. As a
normal :keyword:`print` implies a newline, the correct behavior can be
guaranteed, but for a :keyword:`print` without newline this is not
possible. In the future, other techniques may be used and this
restriction may be lifted.

Assert statement
----------------

An :keyword:`assert` statement in Python looks as follow::

    assert test_expression

It can be converted provided ``test_expression`` is convertible.


Delay objects
-------------

Delay objects are constructed as follows::

    delay(t)

with ``t`` an integer. They are used in :keyword:`yield` statements and
as the argument of :func:`always` decorators, to specify delays.
They can now be converted.

Methodology notes
-----------------

The question is whether the conversion restrictions permit to develop
sufficiently complex test benches. In this section, we present some
insights about this.

The most important restrictions are the types that can be used. These
remain "hardware-oriented" as before.

Even in the previous MyHDL release, the "convertible subset" was much
wider than the "synthesis subset". For example, :keyword:`while` and
:keyword:`raise` statement were already convertible.

The support for :func:`delay()` objects is the most important new feature
to write high-level models and test benches.

With the :keyword:`print` statement, simple debugging can be done.

Of particular interest is the :keyword:`assert` statement. Originally,
:keyword:`assert` statements were only intended to insert debugging
assertions in code. Recently, there is a tendency to use them to write
self-checking unit tests, controlled by unit test frameworks such as
``py.test``. In particular, they are a powerful way to write
self-checking test benches for MyHDL designs. As :keyword:`assert`
statements are now convertible, a whole test suite in MyHDL can be
converted to an equivalent test suite in Verilog and VHDL.

Finally, the same techniques as for synthesizable code can be used
to master complexity. In particular, any code outside generators
is executed during elaboration, and therefore not considered in
the conversion process. This feature can for example be used for
complex calculations that set up constants or expected results.
Furthermore, a tuple of ints can be used to hold a table of
values that will be mapped to a case statement in Verilog and VHDL.


Conversion output verification
==============================

.. note:: This functionality is not needed in a typical
          design flow. It is only relevant to debug the
          MyHDL convertor itself.


Approach
--------

To verify the convertor output, a methodology has been developed and
implemented that doesn't rely on co-simulation and works for both
Verilog and VHDL.

The solution builds on the features explained in section :ref:`new06-test`.
The idea is basically to convert the test bench as well as the
functional code. In particular, ``print`` statements in MyHDL are
converted to equivalent statements in the HDL. The verification
process consists of running both the MyHDL and the HDL simulation,
comparing the simulation output, and reporting any differences.

The goal is to make the verification process as easy as possible. The
use of ``print`` statements to debug a design is a very common and
simple technique. The verification process itself is implemented in a
single function with an interface that is identical to ``toVHDL`` and
``toVerilog``.

As this is a native Python solution, it runs on any platform on which
the HDL simulator runs. Moreover, any HDL simulator can be used as no
``vpi`` or ``vhpi`` capabilities are needed. Of course, per HDL
simulator some customization is required to define the details on how
it is used. This needs to be done once per HDL simulator and is fully
under user control.

Verification interface
----------------------

All functions related to conversion verification are implemented in
the ``myhdl.conversion`` package. (To keep the ``myhdl`` namespace
clean, they are not available from the ``myhdl`` namespace directly.)

.. function:: verify(func[, *args][, **kwargs])

  Used like :func:`toVHDL()`. It converts MyHDL code,
  simulates both the MyHDL code and the HDL code and reports any
  differences. The default HDL simulator is GHDL.

.. function:: analyze(func[, *args][, **kwargs])

  Used like :func:`toVHDL()`. It converts MyHDL code, and analyzes the
  resulting HDL. 
  Used to verify whether the HDL output is syntactically correct.

The two previous functions have the following attribute:

.. attribute:: analyze.simulator

  Used to set the name of the HDL analyzer. GHDL
  is the default.

.. attribute:: verify.simulator

  Used to set the name of the HDL simulator. GHDL
  is the default.

HDL simulator registration
--------------------------

To be able to use a HDL simulator to verify conversions, it needs to
be registered first. This is needed once per simulator (or rather, per
set of analysis and simulation commands). Registering is done with the
following function:

.. function:: registerSimulator(name=None, hdl=None, analyze=None, elaborate=None, simulate=None, offset=0)

   Registers a particular HDL simulator to be used by  :func:`verify()`
   and :func:`analyze()`. *name* is the name of the simulator.
   *hdl* specifies the HDL: ``"VHDL"`` or ``"Verilog"``.
   *analyze* is a command string to analyze the HDL source code.
   *elaborate* is a command string to elaborate the HDL
   code. This command is optional.
   *simulate* is a command string to simulate the HDL code.
   *offset* is an integer specifying the number of initial lines to be ignored
   from the HDL simulator output. 

   The command strings should be string templates that refer to the
   ``topname`` variable that specifies the design name. The templates
   can also use the ``unitname`` variable which is the lower case
   version of ``topname``.
   The command strings can assume that a subdirectory called
   ``work`` is available in the current working directory. Analysis and
   elaboration results can be put there if desired.

   The :func:`analyze()` function runs the *analyze* command.
   The :func:`verify()` function runs the *analyze* command, then the
   *elaborate* command if any, and then the *simulate* command.

   The GHDL simulator is registered by default, but its
   registration can be overwritten if required.


Example: preregistered HDL simulators
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A number of open-source HDL simulators are preregistered in the
MyHDL distribution. If they are installed in the typical way, they
are readily available for conversion verification.
We will illustrate the registration process by showing the
registrations of these simulators.

GHDL registration::

    registerSimulator(
        name="GHDL",
        hdl="VHDL",
        analyze="ghdl -a --workdir=work pck_myhdl_%(version)s.vhd %(topname)s.vhd",
        elaborate="ghdl -e --workdir=work -o %(unitname)s_ghdl %(topname)s",
        simulate="ghdl -r %(unitname)s_ghdl"
        )


Icarus registration::

    registerSimulator(
        name="icarus",
        hdl="Verilog",
        analyze="iverilog -o %(topname)s.o %(topname)s.v",
        simulate="vvp %(topname)s.o"
        )


cver registration::

    registerSimulator(
        name="cver",
        hdl="Verilog",
        analyze="cver -c -q %(topname)s.v",
        simulate="cver -q %(topname)s.v",
        offset=3
        )


New modeling features
=====================

New signed() method for intbv
-----------------------------

The :class:`intbv` object has a new method :meth:`signed()` that
implements sign extension. The extended bit is the msb bit of
the bit representation of the object.

Clearly, this method only has an effect for :class:`intbv` objects
whose valid values are a finite range of positive integers.

This method can be converted to VHDL and Verilog.


always_comb and list of signals
-------------------------------

In the previous MyHDL release, one could use lists of signals
in an :func:`always_comb` block, but they were not considered to infer
the sensitivity list. To several users, this was unexpected
behavior, or even a bug.

In the present release, lists of signals are considered and
the corresponding signals are added to the sensitivity list.
The convertor to Verilog and VHDL is adapted accordingly.


Backwards incompatible changes
==============================


.. _new06-deco:

Decorator usage
---------------

The basic building block of a MyHDL design is a specialized Python
generator.

In MyHDL 0.5, decorators were introduced to make it easier to create
useful MyHDL generators. Moreover, they make the code clearer. As a
result, they are now the de facto standard to describe hardware
modules in MyHDL.

The implementation of certain tasks, such a signal tracing and
conversion, can be simplified significantly if decorators are used to
create the generators. These simplifications have now been adopted in
the code. This means that decorator usage is assumed.  Legacy code
written for the mentioned purposes without decorators, can always be
easily converted into code with decorators.

For pure modeling, it doesn't matter how generators are created and
this will remain so. Therefore, designers can continue to experiment
with innovative modeling concepts in the fullest generality.

instances() function
--------------------

The :func:`instances()` function can be used to automatically lookup and
return the instances that are defined in a MyHDL module.  In accordance
with the section :ref:`new06-deco`, its functionality has been
changed. Only generators created by decorators are considered when
looking up instances.


Conversion of printing without a newline
----------------------------------------

Printing without a newline (a print statement followed by a comma) is
no longer supported by the convertor to Verilog. This is done to be
compatible with the convertor to VHDL. Currently, the VHDL solution
relies on ``std.textio`` and this implies that printing without a
newline cannot be reliably converted.



